
ANNA. Wait? I don't want to wait. The idea, wait! I only want one word.
Is he a colonel or what? Eh? [Disgusted.] There, he's gone! You'll pay
for it! It's all your fault--you, with your "Mamma, dear, wait a moment,
I'll just pin my scarf. I'll come directly." Yes, directly! Now we have
missed the news. It's all your confounded coquettishness. You heard the
Postmaster was here and so you must prink and prim yourself in front of
the mirror--look on this side and that side and all around. You imagine
he's smitten with you. But I can tell you he makes a face at you the
moment you turn your back.

MARYA. It can't be helped, mamma. We'll know everything in a couple of
hours anyway.

ANNA. In a couple of hours! Thank you! A nice answer. Why don't you
say, in a month. We'll know still more in a month. [She leans out of the
window.] Here, Avdotya! I say! Have you heard whether anybody has come,
Avdotya?--No, you goose, you didn't--He waved his hands? Well, what of
it? Let him wave his hands. But you should have asked him anyhow.
You couldn't find out, of course, with your head full of nonsense and
lovers. Eh, what? They left in a hurry? Well, you should have run after
the carriage. Off with you, off with you at once, do you hear? Run and
ask everybody where they are. Be sure and find out who the newcomer
is and what he is like, do you hear? Peep through a crack and find
everything out--what sort of eyes he has, whether they are black or
blue, and be back here instantly, this minute, do you hear? Quick,
quick, quick!

She keeps on calling and they both stand at the window until the curtain
drops.




ACT II


A small room in the inn, bed, table, travelling bag, empty bottle,
boots, clothes brush, etc.



SCENE I


OSIP [lying on his master's bed]. The devil take it! I'm so hungry.
There's a racket in my belly, as if a whole regiment were blowing
trumpets. We'll never reach home. I'd like to know what we are going to
do. Two months already since we left St. Pete. He's gone through all his
cash, the precious buck, so now he sticks here with his tail between his
legs and takes it easy. We'd have had enough and more than enough to pay
for the fare, but no he must exhibit himself in every town. [Imitates
him.] "Osip, get me the best room to be had and order the best dinner
they serve. I can't stand bad food. I must have the best." It would be
all right for a somebody, but for a common copying clerk! Goes and gets
acquainted with the other travellers, plays cards, and plays himself
out of his last penny. Oh, I'm sick of this life. It's better in our
village, really. There isn't so much going on, but then there is less to
bother about. You get yourself a wife and lie on the stove all the time
and eat pie. Of course, if you wanted to tell the truth, there's no
denying it that there's nothing like living in St. Pete. All you want is
money. And then you can live smart and classy--theeadres, dogs to dance
for you, everything, and everybody talks so genteel, pretty near like
in high society. If you go to the Schukin bazaar, the shopkeepers cry,
"Gentlemen," at you. You sit with the officials in the ferry boat. If
you want company, you go into a shop. A sport there will tell you about
life in the barracks and explain the meaning of every star in the sky,
so that you see them all as if you held them in your hand. Then an old
officer's wife will gossip, or a pretty chambermaid will dart a look
at you--ta, ta, ta! [Smirks and wags his head.] And what deucedly civil
manners they have, too. You never hear no impolite language. They always
say "Mister" to you. If you are tired of walking, why you take a cab
and sit in it like a lord. And if you don't feel like paying, then you
don't. Every house has an open-work gate and you can slip through
and the devil himself won't catch you. There's one bad thing, though;
sometimes you get first class eats and sometimes you're so starved you
nearly drop--like now. It's all his fault. What can you do with him? His
dad sends him money to keep him going, but the devil a lot it does. He
goes off on a spree, rides in cabs, gets me to buy a theeadre ticket for
him every day, and in a week look at him--sends me to the old clo'es man
to sell his new dress coat. Sometimes he gets rid of everything down to
his last shirt and is left with nothing except his coat and overcoat.
Upon my word, it's the truth. And such fine cloth, too. English, you
know. One dress coat costs him a hundred and fifty rubles and he sells
it to the old clo'es man for twenty. No use saying nothing about his
pants. They go for a song. And why? Because he doesn't tend to his
business. Instead of sticking to his job, he gads about on the Prospect
and plays cards. Ah, if the old gentleman only knew it! He wouldn't care
that you are an official. He'd lift up your little shirtie and would lay
it on so that you'd go about rubbing yourself for a week. If you have
a job, stick to it. Here's the innkeeper says he won't let you have
anything to eat unless you pay your back bills. Well, and suppose we
don't pay. [Sighing.] Oh, good God! If only I could get cabbage soup. I
think I could eat up the whole world now. There's a knock at the door. I
suppose it's him. [Rises from the bed hastily.]



SCENE II

