

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with

almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or

re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included

with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Inspector-General



Author: Nicolay Gogol



Translator: Thomas Seltzer



Release Date: February, 2003  [Etext #3735]

Posting Date: February 14, 2010



Language: English





*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL ***









Produced by Judy Boss











THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL



By Nicolay Gogol



A comedy in five acts



Translated by Thomas Seltzer from the Russian









INTRODUCTION





The Inspector-General is a national institution. To place a purely

literary valuation upon it and call it the greatest of Russian comedies

would not convey the significance of its position either in Russian

literature or in Russian life itself. There is no other single work in

the modern literature of any language that carries with it the wealth of

associations which the Inspector-General does to the educated Russian.

The Germans have their Faust; but Faust is a tragedy with a cosmic

philosophic theme. In England it takes nearly all that is implied in the

comprehensive name of Shakespeare to give the same sense of bigness that

a Russian gets from the mention of the Revizor.



That is not to say that the Russian is so defective in the critical

faculty as to balance the combined creative output of the greatest

English dramatist against Gogol's one comedy, or even to attribute to

it the literary value of any of Shakespeare's better plays. What the

Russian's appreciation indicates is the pregnant role that literature

plays in the life of intellectual Russia. Here literature is not a

luxury, not a diversion. It is bone of the bone, flesh of the flesh, not

only of the intelligentsia, but also of a growing number of the common

people, intimately woven into their everyday existence, part and parcel

of their thoughts, their aspirations, their social, political and

economic life. It expresses their collective wrongs and sorrows, their

collective hopes and strivings. Not only does it serve to lead the

movements of the masses, but it is an integral component element of

those movements. In a word, Russian literature is completely bound up

with the life of Russian society, and its vitality is but the measure of

the spiritual vitality of that society.



This unique character of Russian literature may be said to have had its

beginning with the Inspector-General. Before Gogol most Russian writers,

with few exceptions, were but weak imitators of foreign models.

The drama fashioned itself chiefly upon French patterns. The

Inspector-General and later Gogol's novel, Dead Souls, established that

tradition in Russian letters which was followed by all the great writers

from Dostoyevsky down to Gorky.



As with one blow, Gogol shattered the notions of the theatre-going

public of his day of what a comedy should be. The ordinary idea of a

play at that time in Russia seems to have been a little like our

own tired business man's. And the shock the Revizor gave those early

nineteenth-century Russian audiences is not unlike the shocks we

ourselves get when once in a while a theatrical manager is courageous

enough to produce a bold modern European play. Only the intensity of

the shock was much greater. For Gogol dared not only bid defiance to the

accepted method; he dared to introduce a subject-matter that under the

guise of humor audaciously attacked the very foundation of the state,

namely, the officialdom of the Russian bureaucracy. That is why the

Revizor marks such a revolution in the world of Russian letters. In form

it was realistic, in substance it was vital. It showed up the rottenness

and corruption of the instruments through which the Russian government

functioned. It held up to ridicule, directly, all the officials of

a typical Russian municipality, and, indirectly, pointed to the same

system of graft and corruption among the very highest servants of the

crown.

