

KHLESTAKOV [a little halting at first, but toward the end in a

loud, firm voice]. Well--what was--to be--done? It's not--my fault.

I'm--really going to pay. They will send me money from home. [Bobchinsky

peeps in at the door.] He's most to blame. He gives me beef as hard as a

board and the soup--the devil knows what he put into it. I ought to have

pitched it out of the window. He starves me the whole day. His tea is so

peculiar--it smells of fish, not tea. So why should I--The idea!



GOVERNOR [scared]. Excuse me! I assure you, it's not my fault. I always

have good beef in the market here. The Kholmogory merchants bring it,

and they are sober, well-behaved people. I'm sure I don't know where he

gets his bad meat from. But if anything is wrong, may I suggest that you

allow me to take you to another place?



KHLESTAKOV. No, I thank you. I don't care to leave. I know what

the other place is--the jail. What right have you, I should like

to know--how dare you?--Why, I'm in the government service at St.

Petersburg. [Puts on a bold front.] I--I--I--



GOVERNOR [aside]. My God, how angry he is. He has found out everything.

Those damned merchants have told him everything.



KHLESTAKOV [with bravado]. I won't go even if you come here with your

whole force. I'll go straight to the minister. [Bangs his fist on the

table.] What do you mean? What do you mean?



GOVERNOR [drawing himself up stiffly and shaking all over]. Have pity

on me. Don't ruin me. I have a wife and little children. Don't bring

misfortune on a man.



KHLESTAKOV. No, I won't go. What's that got to do with me? Must I go

to jail because you have a wife and little children? Great! [Bobchinsky

looks in at the door and disappears in terror.] No, much obliged to you.

I will not go.



GOVERNOR [trembling]. It was my inexperience. I swear to you, it was

nothing but my inexperience and insufficient means. Judge for yourself.

The salary I get is not enough for tea and sugar. And if I have taken

bribes, they were mere trifles--something for the table, or a coat or

two. As for the officer's widow to whom they say I gave a beating, she's

in business now, and it's a slander, it's a slander that I beat her.

Those scoundrels here invented the lie. They are ready to murder me.

That's the kind of people they are.



KHLESTAKOV. Well. I've nothing to do with them. [Reflecting.] I

don't see, though, why you should talk to me about your scoundrels or

officer's widow. An officer's widow is quite a different matter.--But

don't you dare to beat me. You can't do it to me--no, sir, you can't.

The idea! Look at him! I'll pay, I'll pay the money. Just now I'm out of

cash. That's why I stay here--because I haven't a single kopek.



GOVERNOR [aside]. Oh, he's a shrewd one. So that's what he's aiming

at? He's raised such a cloud of dust you can't tell what direction he's

going. Who can guess what he wants? One doesn't know where to begin. But

I will try. Come what may, I'll try--hit or miss. [Aloud.] H'm, if you

really are in want of money, I'm ready to serve you. It is my duty to

assist strangers in town.



KHLESTAKOV. Lend me some, lend me some. Then I'll settle up immediately

with the landlord. I only want two hundred rubles. Even less would do.



GOVERNOR. There's just two hundred rubles. [Giving him the money.] Don't

bother to count it.



KHLESTAKOV [taking it]. Very much obliged to you. I'll send it back to

you as soon as I get home. I just suddenly found myself without--H'm--I

see you are a gentleman. Now it's all different.



GOVERNOR [aside]. Well, thank the Lord, he's taken the money. Now I

suppose things will move along smoothly. I slipped four hundred instead

of two into his hand.



KHLESTAKOV. Ho, Osip! [Osip enters.] Tell the servant to come. [To the

Governor and Dobchinsky.] Please be seated. [To Dobchinsky.] Please take

a seat, I beg of you.



GOVERNOR. Don't trouble. We can stand.



KHLESTAKOV. But, please, please be seated. I now see perfectly how

open-hearted and generous you are. I confess I thought you had come to

put me in--[To Dobchinsky.] Do take a chair.



The Governor and Dobchinsky sit down. Bobchinsky looks in at the door

and listens.



GOVERNOR [aside]. I must be bolder. He wants us to pretend he is

incognito. Very well, we will talk nonsense, too. We'll pretend we

haven't the least idea who he is. [Aloud.] I was going about in the

performance of my duty with Piotr Ivanovich Dobchinsky here--he's a

landed proprietor here--and we came to the inn to see whether the guests

are properly accommodated--because I'm not like other governors, who

don't care about anything. No, apart from my duty, out of pure Christian

philanthropy, I wish every mortal to be decently treated. And as if

to reward me for my pains, chance has afforded me this pleasant

acquaintance.



KHLESTAKOV. I, too, am delighted. Without your aid, I confess, I should

have had to stay here a long time. I didn't know how in the world to pay

my bill.

