

GOVERNOR [aside]. Oh, yes, fib on.--Didn't know how to pay his bill! May

I ask where your Honor is going?



KHLESTAKOV. I'm going to my own village in the Government of Saratov.



GOVERNOR [aside, with an ironical expression on his face]. The

Government of Saratov! H'm, h'm! And doesn't even blush! One must be

on the qui vive with this fellow. [Aloud.] You have undertaken a great

task. They say travelling is disagreeable because of the delay in

getting horses but, on the other hand, it is a diversion. You are

travelling for your own amusement, I suppose?



KHLESTAKOV. No, my father wants me. He's angry because so far I haven't

made headway in the St. Petersburg service. He thinks they stick the

Vladimir in your buttonhole the minute you get there. I'd like him to

knock about in the government offices for a while.



GOVERNOR [aside]. How he fabricates! Dragging in his old father, too.

[Aloud.] And may I ask whether you are going there to stay for long?



KHLESTAKOV. I really don't know. You see, my father is stubborn and

stupid--an old dotard as hard as a block of wood. I'll tell him straight

out, "Do what you will, I can't live away from St. Petersburg." Really,

why should I waste my life among peasants? Our times make different

demands on us. My soul craves enlightenment.



GOVERNOR [aside]. He can spin yarns all right. Lie after lie and never

trips. And such an ugly insignificant-looking creature, too. Why, it

seems to me I could crush him with my finger nails. But wait, I'll make

you talk. I'll make you tell me things. [Aloud.] You were quite right

in your observation, that one can do nothing in a dreary out-of-the-way

place. Take this town, for instance. You lie awake nights, you work hard

for your country, you don't spare yourself, and the reward? You don't

know when it's coming. [He looks round the room.] This room seems rather

damp.



KHLESTAKOV. Yes, it's a dirty room. And the bugs! I've never experienced

anything like them. They bite like dogs.



GOVERNOR. You don't say! An illustrious guest like you to be subjected

to such annoyance at the hands of--whom? Of vile bugs which should never

have been born. And I dare say, it's dark here, too.



KHLESTAKOV. Yes, very gloomy. The landlord has introduced the custom of

not providing candles. Sometimes I want to do something--read a bit, or,

if the fancy strikes me, write something.--I can't. It's a dark room,

yes, very dark.



GOVERNOR. I wonder if I might be bold enough to ask you--but, no, I'm

unworthy.



KHLESTAKOV. What is it?



GOVERNOR. No, no, I'm unworthy. I'm unworthy.



KHLESTAKOV. But what is it?



GOVERNOR. If I might be bold enough--I have a fine room for you at

home, light and cosy. But no, I feel it is too great an honor. Don't

be offended. Upon my word, I made the offer out of the simplicity of my

heart.



KHLESTAKOV. On the contrary, I accept your invitation with pleasure.

I should feel much more comfortable in a private house than in this

disreputable tavern.



GOVERNOR. I'm only too delighted. How glad my wife will be. It's my

character, you know. I've always been hospitable from my very childhood,

especially when my guest is a distinguished person. Don't think I say

this out of flattery. No, I haven't that vice. I only speak from the

fullness of my heart.



KHLESTAKOV. I'm greatly obliged to you. I myself hate double-faced

people. I like your candor and kind-heartedness exceedingly. And I am

free to say, I ask for nothing else than devotion and esteem--esteem and

devotion.







SCENE IX





The above and the Servant, accompanied by Osip. Bobchinsky peeps in at

the door.



SERVANT. Did your Honor wish anything?



KHLESTAKOV. Yes, let me have the bill.



SERVANT. I gave you the second one a little while ago.



KHLESTAKOV. Oh, I can't remember your stupid accounts. Tell me what the

whole comes to.



SERVANT. You were pleased to order dinner the first day. The second day

you only took salmon. And then you took everything on credit.



KHLESTAKOV. Fool! [Starts to count it all up now.] How much is it

altogether?

