LUKA. I venture to report to you--[Aside.] I don't know what I'm saying.



KHLESTAKOV. Ah, you don't want to say. I suppose some little brunette or

other has cast a spell over you. Confess, she has, hasn't she?



Luka Lukich remains silent.



KHLESTAKOV. Ah, you're blushing. You see. Why don't you speak?



LUKA. I'm scared, your Hon--High--Ex--[Aside.] Done for! My confounded

tongue has undone me!



KHLESTAKOV. You're scared? There IS something awe-inspiring in my eyes,

isn't there? At least I know not a single woman can resist them. Isn't

that so?



LUKA. Exactly.



KHLESTAKOV. A strange thing happened to me on the road. I ran entirely

out of cash. Can you lend me three hundred rubles?



LUKA [clutching his pockets. Aside]. A fine business if I haven't got

the money! I have! I have! [Takes out the bills and gives them to him,

trembling.]



KHLESTAKOV. Thank you very much.



LUKA [drawing himself up, with his hand on his sword]. I will not

venture to disturb you with my presence any longer.



KHLESTAKOV. Good-by.



LUKA [dashes out almost at a run, saying aside.] Well, thank the Lord!

Maybe he won't inspect the schools.







SCENE VI





Khlestakov and Artemy Filippovich.



ARTEMY [enters and draws himself up, his hand on his sword]. I have the

honor to present myself--Superintendent of Charities, Court Councilor

Zemlianika.



KHLESTAKOV. Howdeedo? Please sit down.



ARTEMY. I had the honor of receiving you and personally conducting you

through the philanthropic institutions committed to my care.



KHLESTAKOV. Oh, yes, I remember. You treated me to a dandy lunch.



ARTEMY. I am glad to do all I can in behalf of my country.



KHLESTAKOV. I admit, my weakness is a good cuisine.--Tell me, please,

won't you--it seems to me you were a little shorter yesterday, weren't

you?



ARTEMY. Quite possible. [After a pause.] I may say I spare myself no

pains and perform the duties of my office with the utmost zeal. [Draws

his chair closer and speaks in a lowered tone.] There's the postmaster,

for example, he does absolutely nothing. Everything is in a fearful

state of neglect. The mail is held up. Investigate for yourself, if you

please, and you will see. The Judge, too, the man who was here just now,

does nothing but hunt hares, and he keeps his dogs in the court

rooms, and his conduct, if I must confess--and for the benefit of the

fatherland, I must confess, though he is my relative and friend--his

conduct is in the highest degree reprehensible. There is a squire here

by the name of Dobchinsky, whom you were pleased to see. Well, the

moment Dobchinsky leaves the house, the Judge is there with Dobchinsky's

wife. I can swear to it. You just take a look at the children. Not one

of them resembles Dobchinsky. All of them, even the little girl, are the

very image of the Judge.



KHLESTAKOV. You don't say so. I never imagined it.



ARTEMY. Then take the School Inspector here. I don't know how the

government could have entrusted him with such an office. He's worse than

a Jacobin freethinker, and he instils such pernicious ideas into the

minds of the young that I can hardly describe it. Hadn't I better put it

all down on paper, if you so order?



KHLESTAKOV. Very well, why not? I should like it very much. I like to

kill the weary hours reading something amusing, you know. What is your

name? I keep forgetting.



ARTEMY. Zemlianika.



KHLESTAKOV. Oh, yes, Zemlianika. Tell me, Mr. Zemlianika, have you any

children?



ARTEMY. Of course. Five. Two are already grown up.



KHLESTAKOV. You don't say! Grown up! And how are they--how are

they--a--a?



ARTEMY. You mean that you deign to ask what their names are?

