What wonder that the Inspector-General became a sort of comedy-epic in

the land of the Czars, the land where each petty town-governor is almost

an absolute despot, regulating his persecutions and extortions according

to the sage saying of the town-governor in the play, "That's the way God

made the world, and the Voltairean free-thinkers can talk against it

all they like, it won't do any good." Every subordinate in the town

administration, all the way down the line to the policemen, follow--not

always so scrupulously--the law laid down by the same authority, "Graft

no higher than your rank." As in city and town, so in village and

hamlet. It is the tragedy of Russian life, which has its roots in that

more comprehensive tragedy, Russian despotism, the despotism that gives

the sharp edge to official corruption. For there is no possible redress

from it except in violent revolutions.



That is the prime reason why the Inspector-General, a mere comedy, has

such a hold on the Russian people and occupies so important a place

in Russian literature. And that is why a Russian critic says, "Russia

possesses only one comedy, the Inspector-General."



The second reason is the brilliancy and originality with which this

national theme was executed. Gogol was above all else the artist. He was

not a radical, nor even a liberal. He was strictly conservative. While

hating the bureaucracy, yet he never found fault with the system

itself or with the autocracy. Like most born artists, he was strongly

individualistic in temperament, and his satire and ridicule were aimed

not at causes, but at effects. Let but the individuals act morally, and

the system, which Gogol never questioned, would work beautifully. This

conception caused Gogol to concentrate his best efforts upon delineation

of character. It was the characters that were to be revealed, their

actions to be held up to scorn and ridicule, not the conditions which

created the characters and made them act as they did. If any lesson at

all was to be drawn from the play it was not a sociological lesson, but

a moral one. The individual who sees himself mirrored in it may be moved

to self-purgation; society has nothing to learn from it.



Yet the play lives because of the social message it carries. The

creation proved greater than the creator. The author of the Revizor was

a poor critic of his own work. The Russian people rejected his

estimate and put their own upon it. They knew their officials and they

entertained no illusions concerning their regeneration so long as the

system that bred them continued to live. Nevertheless, as a keen satire

and a striking exposition of the workings of the hated system itself,

they hailed the Revizor with delight. And as such it has remained graven

in Russia's conscience to this day.



It must be said that "Gogol himself grew with the writing of the

Revizor." Always a careful craftsman, scarcely ever satisfied with the

first version of a story or a play, continually changing and rewriting,

he seems to have bestowed special attention on perfecting this comedy.

The subject, like that of Dead Souls, was suggested to him by the poet

Pushkin, and was based on a true incident. Pushkin at once recognized

Gogol's genius and looked upon the young author as the rising star

of Russian literature. Their acquaintance soon ripened into intimate

friendship, and Pushkin missed no opportunity to encourage and stimulate

him in his writings and help him with all the power of his great

influence. Gogol began to work on the play at the close of 1834, when he

was twenty-five years old. It was first produced in St. Petersburg,

in 1836. Despite the many elaborations it had undergone before Gogol

permitted it to be put on the stage, he still did not feel satisfied,

and he began to work on it again in 1838. It was not brought down to its

present final form until 1842.



Thus the Revizor occupied the mind of the author over a period of

eight years, and resulted in a product which from the point of view of

characterization and dramatic technique is almost flawless. Yet far

more important is the fact that the play marked an epoch in Gogol's own

literary development. When he began on it, his ambitions did not rise

above making it a comedy of pure fun, but, gradually, in the course of

his working on it, the possibilities of the subject unfolded themselves

and influenced his entire subsequent career. His art broadened and

deepened and grew more serious. If Pushkin's remark, that "behind his

laughter you feel the sad tears," is true of some of Gogol's former

productions, it is still truer of the Revizor and his later works.



A new life had begun for him, he tells us himself, when he was no longer

"moved by childish notions, but by lofty ideas full of truth." "It was

Pushkin," he writes, "who made me look at the thing seriously. I saw

that in my writings I laughed vainly, for nothing, myself not knowing

why. If I was to laugh, then I had better laugh over things that are

really to be laughed at. In the Inspector-General I resolved to gather

together all the bad in Russia I then knew into one heap, all the

injustice that was practised in those places and in those human

relations in which more than in anything justice is demanded of men, and

to have one big laugh over it all. But that, as is well known, produced

an outburst of excitement. Through my laughter, which never before came

to me with such force, the reader sensed profound sorrow. I myself

felt that my laughter was no longer the same as it had been, that in my

writings I could no longer be the same as in the past, and that the need

to divert myself with innocent, careless scenes had ended along with my

young years."



With the strict censorship that existed in the reign of Czar Nicholas I,

it required powerful influence to obtain permission for the production

of the comedy. This Gogol received through the instrumentality of

his friend, Zhukovsky, who succeeded in gaining the Czar's personal

intercession. Nicholas himself was present at the first production in

April, 1836, and laughed and applauded, and is said to have remarked,

"Everybody gets it, and I most of all."

