

SCENE XI





The same, Derzhimorda and Svistunov.



GOVERNOR. Sh--sh! Bandy-legged bears--thumping their boots on the floor!

Bump, bump as if a thousand pounds were being unloaded from a wagon.

Where in the devil have you been knocking about?



DERZHIMORDA. I had your order--



GOVERNOR. Hush! [Puts his hand over Derzhimorda's mouth.] Like a bull

bellowing. [Mocking him.] "I had your order--" Makes a noise like an

empty barrel. [To Osip.] Go, friend, and get everything ready for your

master. And you two, you stand on the steps and don't you dare budge

from the spot. And don't let any strangers enter the house, especially

the merchants. If you let a single one in, I'll--The instant you see

anybody with a petition, or even without a petition and he looks as if

he wanted to present a petition against me, take him by the scruff of

the neck, give him a good kick, [shows with his foot] and throw him out.

Do you hear? Hush--hush!



He goes out on tiptoe, preceded by the Sergeants.



CURTAIN









ACT IV





SCENE: Same as in Act III.







SCENE I





Enter cautiously, almost on tiptoe, Ammos Fiodorovich, Artemy

Filippovich, the Postmaster, Luka Lukich, Dobchinsky and Bobchinsky in

full dress-uniform.



AMMOS. For God's sake, gentlemen, quick, form your line, and let's have

more order. Why, man alive, he goes to Court and rages at the Imperial

Council. Draw up in military line, strictly in military line. You, Piotr

Ivanovich, take your place there, and you, Piotr Ivanovich, stand here.

[Both the Piotr Ivanoviches run on tiptoe to the places indicated.]



ARTEMY. Do as you please, Ammos Fiodorovich, I think we ought to try.



AMMOS. Try what?



ARTEMY. It's clear what.



AMMOS. Grease?



ARTEMY. Exactly, grease.



AMMOS. It's risky, the deuce take it. He'll fly into a rage at us. He's

a government official, you know. Perhaps it should be given to him in

the form of a gift from the nobility for some sort of memorial?



POSTMASTER. Or, perhaps, tell him some money has been sent here by post

and we don't know for whom?



ARTEMY. You had better look out that he doesn't send you by post a good

long ways off. Look here, things of such a nature are not done this way

in a well-ordered state. What's the use of a whole regiment here? We

must present ourselves to him one at a time, and do--what ought to be

done, you know--so that eyes do not see and ears do not hear. That's

the way things are done in a well-ordered society. You begin it, Ammos

Fiodorovich, you be the first.



AMMOS. You had better go first. The distinguished guest has eaten in

your institution.



ARTEMY. Then Luka Lukich, as the enlightener of youth, should go first.



LUKA. I can't, I can't, gentlemen. I confess I am so educated that the

moment an official a single degree higher than myself speaks to me, my

heart stands still and I get as tongue-tied as though my tongue were

caught in the mud. No, gentlemen, excuse me. Please let me off.



ARTEMY. It's you who have got to do it, Ammos Fiodorovich. There's no

one else. Why, every word you utter seems to be issuing from Cicero's

mouth.



AMMOS. What are you talking about! Cicero! The idea! Just because a man

sometimes waxes enthusiastic over house dogs or hunting hounds.



ALL [pressing him]. No, not over dogs, but the Tower of Babel, too.

Don't forsake us, Ammos Fiodorovich, help us. Be our Saviour!



AMMOS. Let go of me, gentlemen.



Footsteps and coughing are heard in Khlestakov's room. All hurry to

the door, crowding and jostling in their struggle to get out. Some are

uncomfortably squeezed, and half-suppressed cries are heard.

