
KHLESTAKOV. All right, all right. I'll try to do it for you. I'll speak
to--I hope--it'll be done, it'll all be done. Yes, yes. [Turning to
Bobchinsky.] Have you anything you'd like to say to me?

BOBCHINSKY. Why, of course. I have a most humble request to make.

KHLESTAKOV. What is it?

BOBCHINSKY. I beg your Highness or your Excellency most worshipfully,
when you get back to St. Petersburg, please tell all the high personages
there, the senators and the admirals, that Piotr Ivanovich Bobchinsky
lives in this town. Say this: "Piotr Ivanovich lives there."

KHLESTAKOV. Very well.

BOBCHINSKY. And if you should happen to speak to the Czar, then tell
him, too: "Your Majesty," tell him, "Your Majesty, Piotr Ivanovich
Bobchinsky lives in this town."

KHLESTAKOV. Very well.

BOBCHINSKY. Pardon me for having troubled you with my presence.

KHLESTAKOV. Not at all, not at all. It was my pleasure. [Sees them to
the door.]



SCENE VIII


KHLESTAKOV [alone]. My, there are a lot of officials here. They seem to
be taking me for a government functionary. To be sure, I threw dust in
their eyes yesterday. What a bunch of fools! I'll write all about it to
Triapichkin in St. Petersburg. He'll write them up in the papers. Let
him give them a nice walloping.--Ho, Osip, give me paper and ink.

OSIP [looking in at the door]. D'rectly.

KHLESTAKOV. Anybody gets caught in Triapichkin's tongue had better look
out. For the sake of a witticism he wouldn't spare his own father. They
are good people though, these officials. It's a nice trait of theirs to
lend me money. I'll just see how much it all mounts up to. Here's
three hundred from the Judge and three hundred from the Postmaster--six
hundred, seven hundred, eight hundred--What a greasy bill!--Eight
hundred, nine hundred.--Oho! Rolls up to more than a thousand! Now, if I
get you, captain, now! We'll see who'll do whom!



SCENE IX


Khlestakov and Osip entering with paper and ink.

KHLESTAKOV. Now, you simpleton, you see how they receive and treat me.
[Begins to write.]

OSIP. Yes, thank God! But do you know what, Ivan Aleksandrovich?

KHLESTAKOV. What?

OSIP. Leave this place. Upon my word, it's time.

KHLESTAKOV [writing]. What nonsense! Why?

OSIP. Just so. God be with them. You've had a good time here for two
days. It's enough. What's the use of having anything more to do with
them? Spit on them. You don't know what may happen. Somebody else may
turn up. Upon my word, Ivan Aleksandrovich. And the horses here are
fine. We'll gallop away like a breeze.

KHLESTAKOV [writing]. No, I'd like to stay a little longer. Let's go
tomorrow.

OSIP. Why tomorrow? Let's go now, Ivan Aleksandrovich, now, 'pon my
word. To be sure, it's a great honor and all that. But really we'd
better go as quick as we can. You see, they've taken you for somebody
else, honest. And your dad will be angry because you dilly-dallied so
long. We'd gallop off so smartly. They'd give us first-class horses
here.

KHLESTAKOV [writing]. All right. But first take this letter to the
postoffice, and, if you like, order post horses at the same time. Tell
the postilions that they should drive like couriers and sing songs, and
I'll give them a ruble each. [Continues to write.] I wager Triapichkin
will die laughing.

OSIP. I'll send the letter off by the man here. I'd rather be packing in
the meanwhile so as to lose no time.

KHLESTAKOV. All right. Bring me a candle.

OSIP [outside the door, where he is heard speaking]. Say, partner, go to
the post office and mail a letter, and tell the postmaster to frank it.
And have a coach sent round at once, the very best courier coach; and
tell them the master doesn't pay fare. He travels at the expense of the
government. And make them hurry, or else the master will be angry. Wait,
the letter isn't ready yet.
