

SCENE II





The same and the Merchants.



GOVERNOR. Ah, how do you do, my fine fellows?



MERCHANTS [bowing]. We wish you health, father.



GOVERNOR. Well, my dearly beloved friends, how are you? How are your

goods selling? So you complained against me, did you, you tea tanks, you

scurvy hucksters? Complain, against me? You crooks, you pirates, you.

Did you gain a lot by it, eh? Aha, you thought you'd land me in prison?

May seven devils and one she-devil take you! Do you know that--



ANNA. Good heavens, Antosha, what words you use!



GOVERNOR [irritated]. Oh, it isn't a matter of words now. Do you know

that the very official to whom you complained is going to marry my

daughter? Well, what do you say to that? Now I'll make you smart. You

cheat the people, you make a contract with the government, and you

do the government out of a hundred thousand, supplying it with rotten

cloth; and when you give fifteen yards away gratis, you expect a reward

besides. If they knew, they would send you to--And you strut about

sticking out your paunches with a great air of importance: "I'm a

merchant, don't touch me." "We," you say, "are as good as the nobility."

Yes, the nobility, you monkey-faces. The nobleman is educated. If he

gets flogged in school, it is for a purpose, to learn something useful.

And you--start out in life learning trickery. Your master beats you for

not being able to cheat. When you are still little boys and don't know

the Lord's Prayer, you already give short measure and short weight. And

when your bellies swell and your pockets fill up, then you assume an air

of importance. Whew! What marvels! Because you guzzle sixteen samovars

full a day, that's why you put on an air of importance. I spit on your

heads and on your importance.



MERCHANTS [bowing]. We are guilty, Anton Antonovich.



GOVERNOR. Complaining, eh? And who helped you with that grafting when

you built a bridge and charged twenty thousand for wood when there

wasn't even a hundred rubles' worth used? I did. You goat beards. Have

you forgotten? If I had informed on you, I could have despatched you to

Siberia. What do you say to that?



A MERCHANT. I'm guilty before God, Anton Antonovich. The evil spirit

tempted me. We will never complain against you again. Ask whatever

satisfaction you want, only don't be angry.



GOVERNOR. Don't be angry! Now you are crawling at my feet. Why? Because

I am on top now. But if the balance dipped the least bit your way, then

you would trample me in the very dirt--you scoundrels! And you would

crush me under a beam besides.



MERCHANTS [prostrating themselves]. Don't ruin us, Anton Antonovich.



GOVERNOR. Don't ruin us! Now you say, don't ruin us! And what did you

say before? I could give you--[shrugging his shoulders and throwing up

his hands.] Well, God forgive you. Enough. I don't harbor malice for

long. Only look out now. Be on your guard. My daughter is going to

marry, not an ordinary nobleman. Let your congratulations be--you

understand? Don't try to get away with a dried sturgeon or a loaf of

sugar. Well, leave now, in God's name.



Merchants leave.







SCENE III





The same, Ammos Fiodorovich, Artemy Filippovich, then Rastakovsky.



AMMOS [in the doorway]. Are we to believe the report, Anton Antonovich?

A most extraordinary piece of good fortune has befallen you, hasn't it?



ARTEMY. I have the honor to congratulate you on your unusual good

fortune. I was glad from the bottom of my heart when I heard it. [Kisses

Anna's hand.] Anna Andreyevna! [Kissing Marya's hand.] Marya Antonovna!



Rastakovsky enters.



RASTAKOVSKY. I congratulate you, Anton Antonovich. May God give you

and the new couple long life and may He grant you numerous

progeny--grand-children and great-grand-children. Anna Andreyevna!

[Kissing her hand.] Marya Antonovna! [Kissing her hand.]







SCENE IV





The same, Korobkin and his Wife, Liuliukov.



KOROBKIN. I have the honor to congratulate you, Anton Antonovich, and

you, Anna Andreyevna [kissing her hand] and you Marya Antonovna [kissing

her hand].



KOROBKIN'S WIFE. I congratulate you from the bottom of my heart, Anna

Andreyevna, on your new stroke of good fortune.

