LIULIUKOV. I have the honor to congratulate you, Anna Andreyevna.

[Kisses her hand and turns to the audience, smacks his lips, putting on

a bold front.] Marya Antonovna, I have the honor to congratulate you.

[Kisses her hand and turns to the audience in the same way.]







SCENE V





A number of Guests enter. They kiss Anna's hand saying: "Anna

Andreyevna," then Marya's hand, saying "Marya Antonovna."



Bobchinsky and Dobchinsky enter jostling each other.



BOBCHINSKY. I have the honor to congratulate you.



DOBCHINSKY. Anton Antonovich, I have the honor to congratulate you.



BOBCHINSKY. On the happy event.



DOBCHINSKY. Anna Andreyevna!



BOBCHINSKY. Anna Andreyevna!



They bend over her hand at the same time and bump foreheads.



DOBCHINSKY. Marya Antonovna! [Kisses her hand.] I have the honor to

congratulate you. You will enjoy the greatest happiness. You will wear

garments of gold and eat the most delicate soups, and you will pass your

time most entertainingly.



BOBCHINSKY [breaking in]. God give you all sorts of riches and of money

and a wee tiny little son, like this. [Shows the size with his hands.]

So that he can sit on the palm of your hand. The little fellow will be

crying all the time, "Wow, wow, wow."







SCENE VI





More Guests enter and kiss the ladies' hands, among them Luka Lukich and

his wife.



LUKA LUKICH. I have the honor.



LUKA'S WIFE [running ahead]. Congratulate you, Anna Andreyevna.

[They kiss.] Really, I was so glad to hear of it. They tell me, "Anna

Andreyevna has betrothed her daughter." "Oh, my God," I think to myself.

It made me so glad that I said to my husband, "Listen, Lukanchik,

that's a great piece of fortune for Anna Andreyevna." "Well," think I

to myself, "thank God!" And I say to him, "I'm so delighted that I'm

consumed with impatience to tell it to Anna Andreyevna herself." "Oh,

my God," think I to myself, "it's just as Anna Andreyevna expected. She

always did expect a good match for her daughter. And now what luck! It

happened just exactly as she wanted it to happen." Really, it made me so

glad that I couldn't say a word. I cried and cried. I simply screamed,

so that Luka Lukich said to me, "What are you crying so for, Nastenka?"

"Lukanchik," I said, "I don't know myself. The tears just keep flowing

like a stream."



GOVERNOR. Please sit down, ladies and gentlemen. Ho, Mishka, bring some

more chairs in.



The Guests seat themselves.







SCENE VII





The same, the Police Captain and Sergeants.



CAPTAIN. I have the honor to congratulate you, your Honor, and to wish

you long years of prosperity.



GOVERNOR. Thank you, thank you! Please sit down, gentlemen.



The Guests seat themselves.



AMMOS. But please tell us, Anton Antonovich, how did it all come about,

and how did it all--ahem!--go?



GOVERNOR. It went in a most extraordinary way. He condescended to make

the proposal in his own person.



ANNA. In the most respectful and most delicate manner. He spoke

beautifully. He said: "Anna Andreyevna, I have only a feeling of respect

for your worth." And such a handsome, cultured man! His manners so

genteel! "Believe me, Anna Andreyevna," he says, "life is not worth a

penny to me. It is only because I respect your rare qualities."



MARYA. Oh, mamma, it was to me he said that.



ANNA. Shut up! You don't know anything. And don't meddle in other

people's affairs. "Anna Andreyevna," he says, "I am enraptured." That

was the flattering way he poured out his soul. And when I was going to

say, "We cannot possibly hope for such an honor," he suddenly went

down on his knees, and so aristocratically! "Anna Andreyevna," he says,

"don't make me the most miserable of men. Consent to respond to my

feelings, or else I'll put an end to my life."

