

The bell rings and the curtain drops.









ACT V





SCENE: Same as in Act IV.







SCENE I





Governor, Anna Andreyevna, and Marya Antonovna.



GOVERNOR. Well, Anna Andreyevna, eh? Did you ever imagine such a thing?

Such a rich prize? I'll be--. Well, confess frankly, it never occurred

to you even in your dreams, did it? From just a simple governor's wife

suddenly--whew!--I'll be hanged!--to marry into the family of such a big

gun.



ANNA. Not at all. I knew it long ago. It seems wonderful to you because

you are so plain. You never saw decent people.



GOVERNOR. I'm a decent person myself, mother. But, really, think, Anna

Andreyevna, what gay birds we have turned into now, you and I. Eh, Anna

Andreyevna? High fliers, by Jove! Wait now, I'll give those fellows who

were so eager to present their petitions and denunciations a peppering.

Ho, who's there? [Enter a Sergeant.] Is it you, Ivan Karpovich? Call

those merchants here, brother, won't you? I'll give it to them, the

scoundrels! To make such complaints against me! The damned pack of Jews!

Wait, my dear fellows. I used to dose you down to your ears. Now I'll

dose you down to your beards. Make a list of all who came to protest

against me, especially the mean petty scribblers who cooked the

petitions up for them, and announce to all that they should know what

honor the Heavens have bestowed upon the Governor, namely this: that he

is marrying his daughter, not to a plain ordinary man, but to one the

like of whom has never yet been in the world, who can do everything,

everything, everything, everything! Proclaim it to all so that everybody

should know. Shout it aloud to the whole world. Ring the bell, the devil

take it! It is a triumph, and we will make it a triumph. [The Sergeant

goes out.] So that's the way, Anna Andreyevna, eh? What shall we do now?

Where shall we live? Here or in St. Pete?



ANNA. In St. Petersburg, of course. How could we remain here?



GOVERNOR. Well, if St. Pete, then St. Pete. But it would be good here,

too. I suppose the governorship could then go to the devil, eh, Anna

Andreyevna?



ANNA. Of course. What's a governorship?



GOVERNOR. Don't you think, Anna Andreyevna, I can rise to a high rank

now, he being hand in glove with all the ministers, and visiting the

court? In time I can be promoted to a generalship. What do you think,

Anna Andreyevna? Can I become a general?



ANNA. I should say so. Of course you can.



GOVERNOR. Ah, the devil take it, it's nice to be a general. They hang a

ribbon across your shoulders. What ribbon is better, the red St. Anne or

the blue St. Andrew?



ANNA. The blue St. Andrew, of course.



GOVERNOR. What! My, you're aiming high. The red one is good, too. Why

does one want to be a general? Because when you go travelling, there are

always couriers and aides on ahead with "Horses"! And at the stations

they refuse to give the horses to others. They all wait, all those

councilors, captains, governors, and you don't take the slightest

notice of them. You dine somewhere with the governor-general. And the

town-governor--I'll keep him waiting at the door. Ha, ha, ha! [He bursts

into a roar of laughter, shaking all over.] That's what's so alluring,

confound it!



ANNA. You always like such coarse things. You must remember that our

life will have to be completely changed, that your acquaintances will

not be a dog-lover of a judge, with whom you go hunting hares, or a

Zemlianika. On the contrary, your acquaintances will be people of the

most refined type, counts, and society aristocrats. Only really I am

afraid of you. You sometimes use words that one never hears in good

society.



GOVERNOR. What of it? A word doesn't hurt.



ANNA. It's all right when you are a town-governor, but there the life is

entirely different.



GOVERNOR. Yes, they say there are two kinds of fish there, the sea-eel

and the smelt, and before you start to eat them, the saliva flows in

your mouth.



ANNA. That's all he thinks about--fish. I shall insist upon our house

being the first in the capital and my room having so much amber in it

that when you come in you have to shut your eyes. [She shuts her eyes

and sniffs.] Oh, how good!



