Naturally official Russia did not relish this innovation in dramatic

art, and indignation ran high among them and their supporters. Bulgarin

led the attack. Everything that is usually said against a new departure

in literature or art was said against the Revizor. It was not original.

It was improbable, impossible, coarse, vulgar; lacked plot. It turned

on a stale anecdote that everybody knew. It was a rank farce. The

characters were mere caricatures. "What sort of a town was it that did

not hold a single honest soul?"



Gogol's sensitive nature shrank before the tempest that burst upon him,

and he fled from his enemies all the way out of Russia. "Do what you

please about presenting the play in Moscow," he writes to Shchepkin four

days after its first production in St. Petersburg. "I am not going to

bother about it. I am sick of the play and all the fussing over it. It

produced a great noisy effect. All are against me... they abuse me and

go to see it. No tickets can be obtained for the fourth performance."



But the best literary talent of Russia, with Pushkin and Bielinsky, the

greatest critic Russia has produced, at the head, ranged itself on his

side.



Nicolay Vasilyevich Gogol was born in Sorochintzy, government of

Poltava, in 1809. His father was a Little Russian, or Ukrainian,

landowner, who exhibited considerable talent as a playwright and actor.

Gogol was educated at home until the age of ten, then went to Niezhin,

where he entered the gymnasium in 1821. Here he edited a students'

manuscript magazine called the Star, and later founded a students'

theatre, for which he was both manager and actor. It achieved such

success that it was patronized by the general public.



In 1829 Gogol went to St. Petersburg, where he thought of becoming

an actor, but he finally gave up the idea and took a position as a

subordinate government clerk. His real literary career began in 1830

with the publication of a series of stories of Little Russian country

life called Nights on a Farm near Dikanka. In 1831 he became acquainted

with Pushkin and Zhukovsky, who introduced the "shy Khokhol" (nickname

for "Little Russian"), as he was called, to the house of Madame O.

A. Smirnov, the centre of "an intimate circle of literary men and the

flower of intellectual society." The same year he obtained a position as

instructor of history at the Patriotic Institute, and in 1834 was made

professor of history at the University of St. Petersburg. Though his

lectures were marked by originality and vivid presentation, he seems on

the whole not to have been successful as a professor, and he resigned in

1835.



During this period he kept up his literary activity uninterruptedly, and

in 1835 published his collection of stories, Mirgorod, containing

How Ivan Ivanovich Quarreled with Ivan Nikiforovich, Taras Bulba, and

others. This collection firmly established his position as a leading

author. At the same time he was at work on several plays. The Vladimir

Cross, which was to deal with the higher St. Petersburg functionaries

in the same way as the Revizor with the lesser town officials, was never

concluded, as Gogol realized the impossibility of placing them on the

Russian stage. A few strong scenes were published. The comedy Marriage,

finished in 1835, still finds a place in the Russian theatrical

repertoire. The Gamblers, his only other complete comedy, belongs to a

later period.



After a stay abroad, chiefly in Italy, lasting with some interruptions

for seven years (1836-1841), he returned to his native country, bringing

with him the first part of his greatest work, Dead Souls. The novel,

published the following year, produced a profound impression and made

Gogol's literary reputation supreme. Pushkin, who did not live to see

its publication, on hearing the first chapters read, exclaimed, "God,

how sad our Russia is!" And Alexander Hertzen characterized it as

"a wonderful book, a bitter, but not hopeless rebuke of contemporary

Russia." Aksakov went so far as to call it the Russian national epic,

and Gogol the Russian Homer.



Unfortunately the novel remained incomplete. Gogol began to suffer

from a nervous illness which induced extreme hypochondria. He became

excessively religious, fell under the influence of pietists and a

fanatical priest, sank more and more into mysticism, and went on a

pilgrimage to Jerusalem to worship at the Holy Sepulchre. In this

state of mind he came to consider all literature, including his own, as

pernicious and sinful.



After burning the manuscript of the second part of Dead Souls, he began

to rewrite it, had it completed and ready for the press by 1851, but

kept the copy and burned it again a few days before his death (1852), so

that it is extant only in parts.



THOMAS SELTZER.









CHARACTERS OF THE PLAY





     ANTON ANTONOVICH SKVOZNIK-DMUKHANOVSKY, the

     Governor.

     ANNA ANDREYEVNA, his wife.

     MARYA ANTONOVNA, his daughter.

     LUKA LUKICH KHLOPOV, the Inspector of Schools.

     His Wife.

     AMMOS FIODOROVICH LIAPKIN-TIAPKIN, the Judge.

     ARTEMY FILIPPOVICH ZEMLIANIKA, the Superintendent of

     Charities.

     IVAN KUZMICH SHPEKIN, the Postmaster.

     PIOTR IVANOVICH DOBCHINSKY. }

     PIOTR IVANOVICH BOBCHINSKY. } Country Squires.

     IVAN ALEKSANDROVICH KHLESTAKOV, an official from St.

     Petersburg.

     OSIP, his servant.

     CHRISTIAN IVANOVICH HÜBNER, the district Doctor.

