KHLESTAKOV. I wonder where he lives now, on Pochtamtskaya or Grokhovaya

Street. He likes to move often, too, to get out of paying rent. I'll

make a guess and send it to Pochtamtskaya Street. [Folds the letter and

addresses it.]



Osip brings the candle. Khlestakov seals the letter with sealing wax. At

that moment Derzhimorda's voice is heard saying: "Where are you going,

whiskers? You've been told that nobody is allowed to come in."



KHLESTAKOV [giving the letter to Osip]. There, have it mailed.



MERCHANT'S VOICE. Let us in, brother. You have no right to keep us out.

We have come on business.



DERZHIMORDA'S VOICE. Get out of here, get out of here! He doesn't

receive anybody. He's asleep.



The disturbance outside grows louder.



KHLESTAKOV. What's the matter there, Osip? See what the noise is about.



OSIP [looking through the window]. There are some merchants there

who want to come in, and the sergeant won't let them. They are waving

papers. I suppose they want to see you.



KHLESTAKOV [going to the window]. What is it, friends?



MERCHANT'S VOICE. We appeal for your protection. Give orders, your

Lordship, that our petitions be received.



KHLESTAKOV. Let them in, let them in. Osip, tell them to come in.



Osip goes out.



KHLESTAKOV [takes the petitions through the window, unfolds one of them

and reads]. "To his most honorable, illustrious financial Excellency,

from the merchant Abdulin...." The devil knows what this is! There's no

such title.







SCENE X





Khlestakov and Merchants, with a basket of wine and sugar loaves.



KHLESTAKOV. What is it, friends?



MERCHANTS. We beseech your favor.



KHLESTAKOV. What do you want?



MERCHANTS. Don't ruin us, your Worship. We suffer insult and wrong

wholly without cause.



KHLESTAKOV. From whom?



A MERCHANT. Why, from our governor here. Such a governor there never was

yet in the world, your Worship. No words can describe the injuries he

inflicts upon us. He has taken the bread out of our mouths by quartering

soldiers on us, so that you might as well put your neck in a noose.

He doesn't treat you as you deserve. He catches hold of your beard

and says, "Oh, you Tartar!" Upon my word, if we had shown him any

disrespect, but we obey all the laws and regulations. We don't mind

giving him what his wife and daughter need for their clothes, but

no, that's not enough. So help me God! He comes to our shop and takes

whatever his eyes fall on. He sees a piece of cloth and says, "Oh, my

friends, that's a fine piece of goods. Take it to my house." So we take

it to his house. It will be almost forty yards.



KHLESTAKOV. Is it possible? My, what a swindler!



MERCHANTS. So help us God! No one remembers a governor like him. When

you see him coming you hide everything in the shop. It isn't only that

he wants a few delicacies and fineries. He takes every bit of trash,

too--prunes that have been in the barrel seven years and that even the

boy in my shop would not eat, and he grabs a fist full. His name day is

St. Anthony's, and you'd think there's nothing else left in the world to

bring him and that he doesn't want any more. But no, you must give him

more. He says St. Onufry's is also his name day. What's to be done? You

have to take things to him on St. Onufry's day, too.



KHLESTAKOV. Why, he's a plain robber.



MERCHANTS. Yes, indeed! And try to contradict him, and he'll fill your

house with a whole regiment of soldiers. And if you say anything, he

orders the doors closed. "I won't inflict corporal punishment on you,"

he says, "or put you in the rack. That's forbidden by law," he says.

"But I'll make you swallow salt herring, my good man."



KHLESTAKOV. What a swindler! For such things a man can be sent to

Siberia.



MERCHANTS. It doesn't matter where you are pleased to send him. Only the

farthest away from here the better. Father, don't scorn to accept our

bread and salt. We pay our respects to you with sugar and a basket of

wine.

