

     FIODR ANDREYEVICH LULIUKOV. } ex-officials,

                                  }esteemed

     IVAN LAZAREVICH RASTAKOVSKY. }personages

     STEPAN IVANOVICH KOROBKIN. }of the town.

     STEPAN ILYICH UKHOVERTOV, the Police Captain.

     SVISTUNOV.   }

     PUGOVITZYN.  }Police Sergeants.

     DERZHIMORDA. }

     ABDULIN, a Merchant.

     FEVRONYA PETROVA POSHLIOPKINA, the Locksmith's wife.

     The Widow of a non-commissioned Officer.

     MISHKA, the Governor's Servant.

     Servant at the Inn.

     Guests, Merchants, Citizens, and Petitioners.





CHARACTERS AND COSTUMES









DIRECTIONS FOR ACTORS





THE GOVERNOR.--A man grown old in the service, by no means a fool in his

own way. Though he takes bribes, he carries himself with dignity. He is

of a rather serious turn and even given somewhat to ratiocination. He

speaks in a voice neither too loud nor too low and says neither too much

nor too little. Every word of his counts. He has the typical hard stern

features of the official who has worked his way up from the lowest rank

in the arduous government service. Coarse in his inclinations, he passes

rapidly from fear to joy, from servility to arrogance. He is dressed in

uniform with frogs and wears Hessian boots with spurs. His hair with a

sprinkling of gray is close-cropped.



ANNA ANDREYEVNA.--A provincial coquette, still this side of middle age,

educated on novels and albums and on fussing with household affairs and

servants. She is highly inquisitive and has streaks of vanity. Sometimes

she gets the upper hand over her husband, and he gives in simply because

at the moment he cannot find the right thing to say. Her ascendency,

however, is confined to mere trifles and takes the form of lecturing and

twitting. She changes her dress four times in the course of the play.



KHLESTAKOV.--A skinny young man of about twenty-three, rather stupid,

being, as they say, "without a czar in his head," one of those persons

called an "empty vessel" in the government offices. He speaks and acts

without stopping to think and utterly lacks the power of concentration.

The words burst from his mouth unexpectedly. The more naiveté

and ingenousness the actor puts into the character the better will he

sustain the role. Khlestakov is dressed in the latest fashion.



OSIP.--A typical middle-aged servant, grave in his address, with eyes

always a bit lowered. He is argumentative and loves to read sermons

directed at his master. His voice is usually monotonous. To his master

his tone is blunt and sharp, with even a touch of rudeness. He is the

cleverer of the two and grasps a situation more quickly. But he does not

like to talk. He is a silent, uncommunicative rascal. He wears a shabby

gray or blue coat.



BOBCHINSKY AND DOBCHINSKY.--Short little fellows, strikingly like

each other. Both have small paunches, and talk rapidly, with emphatic

gestures of their hands, features and bodies. Dobchinsky is slightly

the taller and more subdued in manner. Bobchinsky is freer, easier and

livelier. They are both exceedingly inquisitive.



LIAPKIN-TIAPKIN.--He has read four or five books and so is a bit of

a freethinker. He is always seeing a hidden meaning in things and

therefore puts weight into every word he utters. The actor should

preserve an expression of importance throughout. He speaks in a bass

voice, with a prolonged rattle and wheeze in his throat, like an

old-fashioned clock, which buzzes before it strikes.



ZEMLIANIKA.--Very fat, slow and awkward; but for all that a sly, cunning

scoundrel. He is very obliging and officious.



SHPEKIN.--Guileless to the point of simplemindedness. The other

characters require no special explanation, as their originals can be met

almost anywhere.



The actors should pay especial attention to the last scene. The last

word uttered must strike all at once, suddenly, like an electric shock.

The whole group should change its position at the same instant. The

ladies must all burst into a simultaneous cry of astonishment, as if

with one throat. The neglect of these directions may ruin the whole

effect.











THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL









ACT I



A Room in the Governor's House.



