





SCENE VIII





The same and the Postmaster, who rushes in with an unsealed letter in

his hand.



POSTMASTER. A most astonishing thing, ladies and gentlemen! The official

whom we took to be an inspector-general is not an inspector-general.



ALL. How so? Not an inspector-general?



POSTMASTER. No, not a bit of it. I found it out from the letter.



GOVERNOR. What are you talking about? What are you talking about? What

letter?



POSTMASTER. His own letter. They bring a letter to the postoffice, I

glance at the address and I see Pochtamtskaya Street. I was struck dumb.

"Well," I think to myself, "I suppose he found something wrong in the

postoffice department and is informing the government." So I unsealed

it.



GOVERNOR. How could you?



POSTMASTER. I don't know myself. A supernatural power moved me. I had

already summoned a courier to send it off by express; but I was overcome

by a greater curiosity than I have ever felt in my life. "I can't,

I can't," I hear a voice telling me. "I can't." But it pulled me and

pulled me. In one ear I heard, "Don't open the letter. You will die

like a chicken," and in the other it was just as if the devil were

whispering, "Open it, open it." And when I cracked the sealing wax, I

felt as if I were on fire; and when I opened the letter, I froze, upon

my word, I froze. And my hands trembled, and everything whirled around

me.



GOVERNOR. But how did you dare to open it? The letter of so powerful a

personage?



POSTMASTER. But that's just the point--he's neither powerful nor a

personage.



GOVERNOR. Then what is he in your opinion?



POSTMASTER. He's neither one thing nor another. The devil knows what he

is.



GOVERNOR [furiously]. How neither one thing nor another? How do you

dare to call him neither one thing nor another? And the devil knows what

besides? I'll put you under arrest.



POSTMASTER. Who--you?



GOVERNOR. Yes, I.



POSTMASTER. You haven't the power.



GOVERNOR. Do you know that he's going to marry my daughter? That I

myself am going to be a high official and will have the power to exile

to Siberia?



POSTMASTER. Oh, Anton Antonovich, Siberia! Siberia is far away. I'd

rather read the letter to you. Ladies and gentlemen, permit me to read

the letter.



ALL. Do read it.



POSTMASTER [reads]. "I hasten to inform you, my dear friend, what

wonderful things have happened to me. On the way here an infantry

captain did me out of my last penny, so that the innkeeper here

wanted to send me to jail, when suddenly, thanks to my St. Petersburg

appearance and dress, the whole town took me for a governor-general. Now

I am staying at the governor's home. I am having a grand time and I am

flirting desperately with his wife and daughter. I only haven't decided

whom to begin with. I think with the mother first, because she seems

ready to accept all terms. You remember how hard up we were taking our

meals wherever we could without paying for them, and how once the pastry

cook grabbed me by the collar for having charged pies that I ate to the

king of England? Now it is quite different. They lend me all the money

I want. They are an awful lot of originals. You would split your sides

laughing at them. I know you write for the papers. Put them in your

literature. In the first place the Governor is as stupid as an old

horse--"



GOVERNOR. Impossible! That can't be in the letter.



POSTMASTER [showing the letter]. Read for yourself.



GOVERNOR [reads]. "As an old horse." Impossible! You put it in yourself.



POSTMASTER. How could I?



ARTEMY. Go on reading.



LUKA. Go on reading.



POSTMASTER [continuing to read]. "The Governor is as stupid as an old

horse--"

