

SCENE I





Anton Antonovich, the Governor, Artemy Filippovich, the Superintendent

of Charities, Luka Lukich, the Inspector of Schools, Ammos Fiodorovich,

the Judge, Stepan Ilyich, Christian Ivanovich, the Doctor, and two

Police Sergeants.



GOVERNOR. I have called you together, gentlemen, to tell you an

unpleasant piece of news. An Inspector-General is coming.



AMMOS FIOD. What, an Inspector-General?



ARTEMY FIL. What, an Inspector-General?



GOVERNOR. Yes, an Inspector from St. Petersburg, incognito. And with

secret instructions, too.



AMMOS. A pretty how-do-you-do!



ARTEMY. As if we hadn't enough trouble without an Inspector!



LUKA LUKICH. Good Lord! With secret instructions!



GOVERNOR. I had a sort of presentiment of it. Last night I kept dreaming

of two rats--regular monsters! Upon my word, I never saw the likes of

them--black and supernaturally big. They came in, sniffed, and then went

away.--Here's a letter I'll read to you--from Andrey Ivanovich. You

know him, Artemy Filippovich. Listen to what he writes: "My dear

friend, godfather and benefactor--[He mumbles, glancing rapidly down the

page.]--and to let you know"--Ah, that's it--"I hasten to let you know,

among other things, that an official has arrived here with instructions

to inspect the whole government, and your district especially. [Raises

his finger significantly.] I have learned of his being here from highly

trustworthy sources, though he pretends to be a private person. So, as

you have your little peccadilloes, you know, like everybody else--you

are a sensible man, and you don't let the good things that come your

way slip by--" [Stopping] H'm, that's his junk--"I advise you to take

precautions, as he may arrive any hour, if he hasn't already, and is not

staying somewhere incognito.--Yesterday--" The rest are family matters.

"Sister Anna Krillovna is here visiting us with her husband. Ivan

Krillovich has grown very fat and is always playing the fiddle"--et

cetera, et cetera. So there you have the situation we are confronted

with, gentlemen.



AMMOS. An extraordinary situation, most extraordinary! Something behind

it, I am sure.



LUKA. But why, Anton Antonovich? What for? Why should we have an

Inspector?



GOVERNOR. It's fate, I suppose. [Sighs.] Till now, thank goodness, they

have been nosing about in other towns. Now our turn has come.



AMMOS. My opinion is, Anton Antonovich, that the cause is a deep one

and rather political in character. It means this, that Russia--yes--that

Russia intends to go to war, and the Government has secretly

commissioned an official to find out if there is any treasonable

activity anywhere.



GOVERNOR. The wise man has hit on the very thing. Treason in this little

country town! As if it were on the frontier! Why, you might gallop three

years away from here and reach nowhere.



AMMOS. No, you don't catch on--you don't--The Government is shrewd. It

makes no difference that our town is so remote. The Government is on the

look-out all the same--



GOVERNOR [cutting him short]. On the look-out, or not on the look-out,

anyhow, gentlemen, I have given you warning. I have made some

arrangements for myself, and I advise you to do the same. You

especially, Artemy Filippovich. This official, no doubt, will want first

of all to inspect your department. So you had better see to it that

everything is in order, that the night-caps are clean, and the patients

don't go about as they usually do, looking as grimy as blacksmiths.



ARTEMY. Oh, that's a small matter. We can get night-caps easily enough.



GOVERNOR. And over each bed you might hang up a placard stating in Latin

or some other language--that's your end of it, Christian Ivanovich--the

name of the disease, when the patient fell ill, the day of the week

and the month. And I don't like your invalids to be smoking such strong

tobacco. It makes you sneeze when you come in. It would be better, too,

if there weren't so many of them. If there are a large number, it

will instantly be ascribed to bad supervision or incompetent medical

treatment.



ARTEMY. Oh, as to treatment, Christian Ivanovich and I have worked out

our own system. Our rule is: the nearer to nature the better. We use

no expensive medicines. A man is a simple affair. If he dies, he'd die

anyway. If he gets well, he'd get well anyway. Besides, the doctor would

have a hard time making the patients understand him. He doesn't know a

word of Russian.



The Doctor gives forth a sound intermediate between M and A.

