GOVERNOR. And you, Ammos Fiodorovich, had better look to the courthouse.

The attendants have turned the entrance hall where the petitioners

usually wait into a poultry yard, and the geese and goslings go poking

their beaks between people's legs. Of course, setting up housekeeping is

commendable, and there is no reason why a porter shouldn't do it. Only,

you see, the courthouse is not exactly the place for it. I had meant to

tell you so before, but somehow it escaped my memory.



AMMOS. Well, I'll have them all taken into the kitchen to-day. Will you

come and dine with me?



GOVERNOR. Then, too, it isn't right to have the courtroom littered up

with all sorts of rubbish--to have a hunting-crop lying right among the

papers on your desk. You're fond of sport, I know, still it's better to

have the crop removed for the present. When the Inspector is gone, you

may put it back again. As for your assessor, he's an educated man, to

be sure, but he reeks of spirits, as if he had just emerged from a

distillery. That's not right either. I had meant to tell you so long

ago, but something or other drove the thing out of my mind. If his

odor is really a congenital defect, as he says, then there are ways of

remedying it. You might advise him to eat onion or garlic, or something

of the sort. Christian Ivanovich can help him out with some of his

nostrums.



The Doctor makes the same sound as before.



AMMOS. No, there's no cure for it. He says his nurse struck him when he

was a child, and ever since he has smelt of vodka.



GOVERNOR. Well, I just wanted to call your attention to it. As regards

the internal administration and what Andrey Ivanovich in his letter

calls "little peccadilloes," I have nothing to say. Why, of course,

there isn't a man living who hasn't some sins to answer for. That's the

way God made the world, and the Voltairean freethinkers can talk against

it all they like, it won't do any good.



AMMOS. What do you mean by sins? Anton Antonovich? There are sins and

sins. I tell everyone plainly that I take bribes. I make no bones about

it. But what kind of bribes? White greyhound puppies. That's quite a

different matter.



GOVERNOR. H'm. Bribes are bribes, whether puppies or anything else.



AMMOS. Oh, no, Anton Antonovich. But if one has a fur overcoat worth

five hundred rubles, and one's wife a shawl--



GOVERNOR. [testily]. And supposing greyhound puppies are the only bribes

you take? You're an atheist, you never go to church, while I at least am

a firm believer and go to church every Sunday. You--oh, I know you. When

you begin to talk about the Creation it makes my flesh creep.



AMMOS. Well, it's a conclusion I've reasoned out with my own brain.



GOVERNOR. Too much brain is sometimes worse than none at all.--However,

I merely mentioned the courthouse. I dare say nobody will ever look at

it. It's an enviable place. God Almighty Himself seems to watch over it.

But you, Luka Lukich, as inspector of schools, ought to have an eye on

the teachers. They are very learned gentlemen, no doubt, with a college

education, but they have funny habits--inseparable from the profession,

I know. One of them, for instance, the man with the fat face--I forget

his name--is sure, the moment he takes his chair, to screw up his face

like this. [Imitates him.] And then he has a trick of sticking his hand

under his necktie and smoothing down his beard. It doesn't matter, of

course, if he makes a face at the pupils; perhaps it's even necessary.

I'm no judge of that. But you yourself will admit that if he does it to

a visitor, it may turn out very badly. The Inspector, or anyone else,

might take it as meant for himself, and then the deuce knows what might

come of it.



LUKA. But what can I do? I have told him about it time and again. Only

the other day when the marshal of the nobility came into the class-room,

he made such a face at him as I had never in my life seen before. I

dare say it was with the best intentions; But I get reprimanded for

permitting radical ideas to be instilled in the minds of the young.



GOVERNOR. And then I must call your attention to the history teacher. He

has a lot of learning in his head and a store of facts. That's evident.

But he lectures with such ardor that he quite forgets himself. Once

I listened to him. As long as he was talking about the Assyrians

and Babylonians, it was not so bad. But when he reached Alexander of

Macedon, I can't describe what came over him. Upon my word, I thought a

fire had broken out. He jumped down from the platform, picked up a chair

and dashed it to the floor. Alexander of Macedon was a hero, it is true.

But that's no reason for breaking chairs. The state must bear the cost.



LUKA. Yes, he is a hot one. I have spoken to him about it several times.

He only says: "As you please, but in the cause of learning I will even

sacrifice my life."



GOVERNOR. Yes, it's a mysterious law of fate. Your clever man is either

a drunkard, or he makes such grimaces that you feel like running away.



LUKA. Ah, Heaven save us from being in the educational department! One's

afraid of everything. Everybody meddles and wants to show that he is as

clever as you.



GOVERNOR. Oh, that's nothing. But this cursed incognito! All of a sudden

he'll look in: "Ah, so you're here, my dear fellows! And who's the judge

here?" says he. "Liapkin-Tiapkin." "Bring Liapkin-Tiapkin here.--And who

is the Superintendent of Charities?" "Zemlianika."--"Bring Zemlianika

here!"--That's what's bad.

