

DOBCHINSKY. Something quite unforeseen. We were about to enter the inn--



BOBCHINSKY [interrupting]. Yes, Piotr Ivanovich and I were entering the

inn--



DOBCHINSKY [interrupting]. Please, Piotr Ivanovich, let me tell.



BOBCHINSKY. No, please, let me--let me. You can't. You haven't got the

style for it.



DOBCHINSKY. Oh, but you'll get mixed up and won't remember everything.



BOBCHINSKY. Yes, I will, upon my word, I will. PLEASE don't interrupt!

Do let me tell the news--don't interrupt! Pray, oblige me, gentlemen,

and tell Dobchinsky not to interrupt.



GOVERNOR. Speak, for Heaven's sake! What is it? My heart is in my mouth!

Sit down, gentlemen, take seats. Piotr Ivanovich, here's a chair for

you. [All seat themselves around Bobchinsky and Dobchinsky.] Well, now,

what is it? What is it?



BOBCHINSKY. Permit me, permit me. I'll tell it all just as it happened.

As soon as I had the pleasure of taking leave of you after you were good

enough to be bothered with the letter which you had received, sir, I ran

out--now, please don't keep interrupting, Dobchinsky. I know all about

it, all, I tell you.--So I ran out to see Korobkin. But not finding

Korobkin at home, I went off to Rastakovsky, and not seeing him, I went

to Ivan Kuzmich to tell him of the news you'd got. Going on from there I

met Dobchinsky--



DOBCHINSKY [interjecting]. At the stall where they sell pies--



BOBCHINSKY. At the stall where they sell pies. Well, I met Dobchinsky

and I said to him: "Have you heard the news that came to Anton

Antonovich in a letter which is absolutely reliable?" But Piotr

Ivanovich had already heard of it from your housekeeper, Avdotya, who, I

don't know why, had been sent to Filipp Antonovich Pachechuyev--



DOBCHINSKY [interrupting]. To get a little keg for French brandy.



BOBCHINSKY. Yes, to get a little keg for French brandy. So then I went

with Dobchinsky to Pachechuyev's.--Will you stop, Piotr Ivanovich?

Please don't interrupt.--So off we went to Pachechuyev's, and on the

way Dobchinsky said: "Let's go to the inn," he said. "I haven't eaten a

thing since morning. My stomach is growling." Yes, sir, his stomach was

growling. "They've just got in a supply of fresh salmon at the inn," he

said. "Let's take a bite." We had hardly entered the inn when we saw a

young man--



DOBCHINSKY [Interrupting]. Of rather good appearance and dressed in

ordinary citizen's clothes.



BOBCHINSKY. Yes, of rather good appearance and dressed in citizen's

clothes--walking up and down the room. There was something out of the

usual about his face, you know, something deep--and a manner about

him--and here [raises his hand to his forehead and turns it around

several times] full, full of everything. I had a sort of feeling, and I

said to Dobchinsky, "Something's up. This is no ordinary matter."

Yes, and Dobchinsky beckoned to the landlord, Vlas, the innkeeper,

you know,--three weeks ago his wife presented him with a baby--a

bouncer--he'll grow up just like his father and keep a tavern.--Well,

we beckoned to Vlas, and Dobchinsky asked him on the quiet, "Who," he

asked, "is that young man?" "That young man," Vlas replied, "that young

man"--Oh, don't interrupt, Piotr Ivanovich, please don't interrupt. You

can't tell the story. Upon my word, you can't. You lisp and one tooth in

your mouth makes you whistle. I know what I'm saying. "That young man,"

he said, "is an official."--Yes, sir.--"On his way from St. Petersburg.

And his name," he said, "is Ivan Aleksandrovich Khlestakov, and he's

going," he said "to the government of Saratov," he said. "And he acts

so queerly. It's the second week he's been here and he's never left the

house; and he won't pay a penny, takes everything on account." When

Vlas told me that, a light dawned on me from above, and I said to Piotr

Ivanovich, "Hey!"--



DOBCHINSKY. No, Piotr Ivanovich, I said "HEY!"



BOBCHINSKY. Well first YOU said it, then I did. "Hey!" said both of us,

"And why does he stick here if he's going to Saratov?"--Yes, sir, that's

he, the official.



GOVERNOR. Who? What official?



BOBCHINSKY. Why, the official who you were notified was coming, the

Inspector.



GOVERNOR [terrified]. Great God! What's that you're saying. It can't be

he.



DOBCHINSKY. It is, though. Why, he doesn't pay his bills and he doesn't

leave. Who else can it be? And his postchaise is ordered for Saratov.



BOBCHINSKY. It's he, it's he, it's he--why, he's so alert, he

scrutinized everything. He saw that Dobchinsky and I were eating

salmon--chiefly on account of Dobchinsky's stomach--and he looked at our

plates so hard that I was frightened to death.



GOVERNOR. The Lord have mercy on us sinners! In what room is he staying?



DOBCHINSKY. Room number 5 near the stairway.

