BOBCHINSKY. In the same room that the officers quarreled in when they
passed through here last year.

GOVERNOR. How long has he been here?

DOBCHINSKY. Two weeks. He came on St. Vasili's day.

GOVERNOR. Two weeks! [Aside.] Holy Fathers and saints preserve me! In
those two weeks I have flogged the wife of a non-commissioned officer,
the prisoners were not given their rations, the streets are dirty as a
pothouse--a scandal, a disgrace! [Clutches his head with both hands.]

ARTEMY. What do you think, Anton Antonovich, hadn't we better go in
state to the inn?

AMMOS. No, no. First send the chief magistrate, then the clergy, then
the merchants. That's what it says in the book. The Acts of John the
Freemason.

GOVERNOR. No, no, leave it to me. I have been in difficult situations
before now. They have passed off all right, and I was even rewarded
with thanks. Maybe the Lord will help us out this time, too. [Turns to
Bobchinsky.] You say he's a young man?

BOBCHINSKY. Yes, about twenty-three or four at the most.

GOVERNOR. So much the better. It's easier to pump things out of a young
man. It's tough if you've got a hardened old devil to deal with. But a
young man is all on the surface. You, gentlemen, had better see to your
end of things while I go unofficially, by myself, or with Dobchinsky
here, as though for a walk, to see that the visitors that come to town
are properly accommodated. Here, Svistunov. [To one of the Sergeants.]

SVISTUNOV. Sir.

GOVERNOR. Go instantly to the Police Captain--or, no, I'll want you.
Tell somebody to send him here as quickly as possibly and then come
back.

Svistunov hurries off.

ARTEMY. Let's go, let's go, Ammos Fiodorovich. We may really get into
trouble.

AMMOS. What have you got to be afraid of? Put clean nightcaps on the
patients and the thing's done.

ARTEMY. Nightcaps! Nonsense! The patients were ordered to have oatmeal
soup. Instead of that there's such a smell of cabbage in all the
corridors that you've got to hold your nose.

AMMOS. Well, my mind's at ease. Who's going to visit the court?
Supposing he does look at the papers, he'll wish he had left them alone.
I have been on the bench fifteen years, and when I take a look into a
report, I despair. King Solomon in all his wisdom could not tell what is
true and what is not true in it.

The Judge, the Superintendent of Charities, the School Inspector, and
Postmaster go out and bump up against the Sergeant in the doorway as the
latter returns.



SCENE IV


The Governor, Bobchinsky, Dobchinsky, and Sergeant Svistunov.

GOVERNOR. Well, is the cab ready?

SVISTUNOV. Yes, sir.

GOVERNOR. Go out on the street--or, no, stop--go and bring--why, where
are the others? Why are you alone? Didn't I give orders for Prokhorov to
be here? Where is Prokhorov?

SVISTUNOV. Prokhorov is in somebody's house and can't go on duty just
now.

GOVERNOR. Why so?

SVISTUNOV. Well, they brought him back this morning dead drunk. They
poured two buckets of water over him, but he hasn't sobered up yet.

GOVERNOR [clutching his head with both hands]. For Heaven's sake! Go
out on duty quick--or, no, run up to my room, do you hear? And fetch my
sword and my new hat. Now, Piotr Ivanovich, [to Dobchinsky] come.

BOBCHINSKY. And me--me, too. Let me come, too, Anton Antonovich.

GOVERNOR. No, no, Bobchinsky, it won't do. Besides there is not enough
room in the cab.

BOBCHINSKY. Oh, that doesn't matter. I'll follow the cab on foot--on
foot. I just want to peep through a crack--so--to see that manner of
his--how he acts.
